# 20220703 FSTAB

> _Note: This applies to Linux systems only!_

## What is /etc/fstab?

In order to mount a drive automatically in linux, you'll have to ensure that it's added to the `/etc/fstab` file.

Whenever I bootstrap a new linux server or desktop, this is one of the setup stages that I always do, to ensure that all of my drives are mounted correctly.

As I bootstrap automatically (mostly), I have quite a few configuration files for a heap of different apps & services that reference those drives, usually by the `/mnt/<drive>` path.   
This means that I need to ensure that no matter which linux OS I'm using or reinstalling, that each drive will still be mounted to the same place

## Help

See some more documentation by using `man fstab` in your terminal

## The file format

I've modified the usual format and vertically-aligned all of the setting headings & values so that it's easier to read (both for you and for me!). Usually, the options/dump/pass sections are all crammed together separated by a single space.

```bash
# /etc/fstab: static file system information.
#
# Use 'blkid' to print the universally unique identifier for a device; this may
# be used with UUID= as a more robust way to name devices that works even if
# disks are added and removed. See fstab(5).
#
# <file system>                          <mount point>  <type>  <options>         <dump> <pass>
UUID=8e519e43-880b-4a9f-83b0-e83899493ca6 /              ext4    defaults,noatime 0      1
UUID=18A7-14C2                            /boot/efi      vfat    umask=0077       0      2
```

Some very basic explanations for some of the more mysterious fields

- dump
  - legacy option for backing up drives using the dump command
  - **_always set this to 0_**
- pass: indicates if a drive should be checked for errors on startup.
  - 0 (default) - don't check this partition
  - 1 = this is the root partition, check it
  - 2 = this is a seconndary partition, check it
  - **_I'd recommend to always use `2` unless you have a specific reason not to_**
- options
  - Define behaviour
  - Super-hard to find documentation on
  - **_The most important option for secondary partitions is `errors=remount-ro`_**
    - This means that the drive will mount in read-only mode if any problems occur

## Making an entry

Let's make an entry!

>> For our example, let's imagine that we want to create an entry that mounts the "music" partition in the `/mnt/music` dir (which, hypothetically, we've already created).   
>> (To make things more interesting, this partition is in `ntfs` format, aka a partition usually created in/for Windows)

1. Find the partition information

    I use one command to get most of the information that I need to create the entry:

    `sudo lsblk -o name,size,label,fstype,partlabel,uuid`

    ```shell
    ☯ ~ sudo lsblk -o name,size,label,fstype,partlabel,uuid
    NAME          SIZE LABEL  FSTYPE   PARTLABEL    UUID
    nvme0n1     931.5G
    ├─nvme0n1p3 341.8G        ext4     root         0bbaa1ff-b625-4972-8099-b59dc15004ee
    ├─nvme0n1p4   334G        ext4     root         15cd5735-4977-430f-ab46-e1202e6ff854
    └─nvme0n1p5   7.8G swap   swap                  088a2190-6ed0-4f76-88ca-70803aada85f
    nvme1n1     931.5G
    ├─nvme1n1p1   512M        vfat                  1a5a2317-3a77
    └─nvme1n1p4 637.1G X      ntfs     music        d2320a36-68e6-4ea1-b5da-6374efa4b355
    ```

2. Ensure that the mount directory exists

    You'll have to ensure that the directory that the drive will be mounted at already exists! You can do this via the following commands:

    ```bash
    # Make the directory
    ☯ ~ sudo mkdir /mnt/music
    # Make your user the owner instead of root
    ☯ ~ sudo chown $USER:$USER /mnt/music
    ```

3. Create the entry

    ```shell
    UUID=d2320a36-68e6-4ea1-b5da-6374efa4b355  /mnt/music  ntfs  errors=remount-ro  0  2
    ```

4. Run!

You can restart your computer, or run

```bash
☯ ~ sudo mount -a
```

If there were no errors, you won't see any output.

Then, check the contents of the mounted directory to see if it has been mounted as expected

```bash
☯ ~ ls -alh /mnt/music
```
